Greater than or equal (>=)
The greater than or equal operator (>=) returns true if the left operand is greater than or equal to the right operand, and false otherwise.

Try it

Syntax
x >= y
Copy to Clipboard
Description
The operands are compared using the Abstract Relational Comparison algorithm. See the documentation for the Less than operator for a summary of this algorithm.

Examples
String to string comparison
console.log("a" >= "b");     // false
console.log("a" >= "a");     // true
console.log("a" >= "3");     // true
Copy to Clipboard
String to number comparison
console.log("5" >= 3);       // true
console.log("3" >= 3);       // true
console.log("3" >= 5);       // false

console.log("hello" >= 5);   // false
console.log(5 >= "hello");   // false
Copy to Clipboard
Number to Number comparison
console.log(5 >= 3);         // true
console.log(3 >= 3);         // true
console.log(3 >= 5);         // false
Copy to Clipboard
Number to BigInt comparison
console.log(5n >= 3);        // true
console.log(3 >= 3n);        // true
console.log(3 >= 5n);        // false
Copy to Clipboard
Comparing Boolean, null, undefined, NaN
console.log(true >= false);  // true
console.log(true >= true);   // true
console.log(false >= true);  // false

console.log(true >= 0);      // true
console.log(true >= 1);      // true

console.log(null >= 0);      // true
console.log(1 >= null);      // true

console.log(undefined >= 3); // false
console.log(3 >= undefined); // false

console.log(3 >= NaN);       // false
console.log(NaN >= 3);       // false
