Less than or equal (<=)
The less than or equal operator (<=) returns true if the left operand is less than or equal to the right operand, and false otherwise.

Try it

Syntax
x <= y
Copy to Clipboard
Description
The operands are compared using the Abstract Relational Comparison algorithm. See the documentation for the Less than operator for a summary of this algorithm.

Examples
String to string comparison
console.log("a" <= "b");     // true
console.log("a" <= "a");     // true
console.log("a" <= "3");     // false
Copy to Clipboard
String to number comparison
console.log("5" <= 3);       // false
console.log("3" <= 3);       // true
console.log("3" <= 5);       // true

console.log("hello" <= 5);   // false
console.log(5 <= "hello");   // false
Copy to Clipboard
Number to Number comparison
console.log(5 <= 3);         // false
console.log(3 <= 3);         // true
console.log(3 <= 5);         // true
Copy to Clipboard
Number to BigInt comparison
console.log(5n <= 3);        // false
console.log(3 <= 3n);        // true
console.log(3 <= 5n);        // true
Copy to Clipboard
Comparing Boolean, null, undefined, NaN
console.log(true <= false);  // false
console.log(true <= true);   // true
console.log(false <= true);  // true

console.log(true <= 0);      // false
console.log(true <= 1);      // true

console.log(null <= 0);      // true
console.log(1 <= null);      // false

console.log(undefined <= 3); // false
console.log(3 <= undefined); // false

console.log(3 <= NaN);       // false
console.log(NaN <= 3);       // false
Copy to Clipboard

